https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/queens-speech-2016

My Lords and Members of the House of Commons.

My government will use the opportunity of a strengthening economy to deliver
security for working people, to increase life chances for the most disadvantaged
and to strengthen national defences.

My ministers will continue to bring the public finances under control so that
Britain lives within its means, and to move to a higher wage and lower welfare
economy where work is rewarded.

To support the economic recovery, and to create jobs and more apprenticeships,
legislation will be introduced to ensure Britain has the infrastructure that
businesses need to grow.

Measures will be brought forward to create the right for every household to
access high speed broadband.

Legislation will be introduced to improve Britain’s competitiveness and make the
United Kingdom a world leader in the digital economy.

My ministers will ensure the United Kingdom is at the forefront of technology
for new forms of transport, including autonomous and electric vehicles.

To spread economic prosperity, my government will continue to support the
development of a Northern Powerhouse.

In England, further powers will be devolved to directly elected mayors,
including powers governing local bus services.

Legislation will also allow local authorities to retain business rates, giving
them more freedom to invest in local communities.

My government will support aspiration and promote home ownership through its
commitment to build a million new homes.

Following last week’s Anti-Corruption Summit in London, legislation will be
introduced to tackle corruption, money laundering and tax evasion.

My government will continue work to deliver NHS services over 7 days of the week
in England. Legislation will be introduced to ensure that overseas visitors pay
for the health treatment they receive at public expense.

New legislation will be introduced to tackle some of the deepest social problems
in society, and improve life chances.

A Bill will be introduced to ensure that children can be adopted by new families
without delay, improve the standard of social work and opportunities for young
people in care in England.

To tackle poverty and the causes of deprivation, including family instability,
addiction and debt, my government will introduce new indicators for measuring
life chances. Legislation will be introduced to establish a soft drinks industry
levy to help tackle childhood obesity.

Measures will be introduced to help the lowest-income families save, through a
new Help to Save scheme, and to create a Lifetime ISA to help young people save
for the long-term.

My government will continue to reform public services so they help the
hardest-to-reach.

A Bill will be brought forward to lay foundations for educational excellence in
all schools, giving every child the best start in life. There will also be a
fairer balance between schools, through the National Funding Formula.

To ensure that more people have the opportunity to further their education,
legislation will be introduced to support the establishment of new universities
and to promote choice and competition across the higher education sector.

My government will legislate to reform prisons and courts to give individuals a
second chance.

Prison Governors will be given unprecedented freedom and they will be able to
ensure prisoners receive better education. Old and inefficient prisons will be
closed and new institutions built where prisoners can be put more effectively to
work.

Action will also be taken to ensure better mental health provision for
individuals in the criminal justice system.

My government will continue to work to bring communities together and strengthen
society.

Legislation will be introduced to prevent radicalisation, tackle extremism in
all its forms, and promote community integration.

National Citizen Service will be placed on a permanent statutory footing.

My government will continue to safeguard national security.

My ministers will invest in Britain’s armed forces, honouring the military
covenant and meeting the NATO commitment to spend 2% of national income on
defence.

They will also act to secure the long-term future of Britain’s nuclear
deterrent.

My government will continue to play a leading role in world affairs, using its
global presence to tackle climate change and address major international
security, economic and humanitarian challenges.

My government will continue to work to resolve the conflict in Ukraine. It will
play a leading role in the campaign against Daesh and to support international
efforts to bring peace to Syria through a lasting political settlement.

Britain’s commitment on international development spending will also be
honoured, helping to deliver global stability, support the Sustainable
Development Goals and prevent new threats to national security.

Prince Philip and I look forward to welcoming His Excellency the President of
Colombia on a State Visit in November.

My government will continue with legislation to modernise the law governing the
use and oversight of investigatory powers by law enforcement, security and
intelligence agencies.

Legislation will strengthen the capability and accountability of the police
service in England and Wales.

My government will hold a referendum on membership of the European Union.
Proposals will be brought forward for a British Bill of Rights.

My ministers will uphold the sovereignty of Parliament and the primacy of the
House of Commons.

My government will continue to work in cooperation with the devolved
administrations to implement the extensive new powers in the Scotland Act and
establish a strong and lasting devolution settlement in Wales. My government
will work in Northern Ireland to secure further progress in implementing the
Stormont House and Fresh Start Agreements.

Members of the House of Commons:

Estimates for the public services will be laid before you.

My Lords and Members of the House of Commons:

Other measures will be laid before you.

I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may rest upon your counsels.
