SINN FÉIN ASSEMBLY MANIFESTO 2017

Arna foilsiú ag Brian Tumilty, Sinn Féin National Director of Elections, Parnell Square, Dublin 1
Clódóir, Nova Print, 155 Northumberland St, Belfast , BT13 2JF

Published by Brian Tumilty, Sinn Féin National Director of Elections, Parnell Square, Dublin 1
Printed by Nova Print, 155 Northumberland St, Belfast , BT13 2JF

[2]

FOREWORD

FROM MICHELLE O’NEILL
A Chara,
No one has worked harder than Martin McGuinness to establish and maintain political institutions
that deliver for all. Institutions that promote the cause of reconciliation and treat people with
equality and respect.
The hope and hard work of Martin McGuinness was undermined by the actions of a Tory government
that failed to honour its commitments and is imposing austerity and Brexit against the will of the
people. The DUP stand with the Tories.
The arrogance and disrespect of the DUP to sections of the community damaged the institutions.
On the back of the financial scandals of NAMA and Red Sky, RHI became the tipping point.
Martin McGuinness called time on all of this. There is no going back to the failure of the past.
In this election Sinn Féin are standing up for equality, integrity and respect. This also means dealing
with the challenges of legacy.
We are moving forward to a society where there is zero tolerance of racism, sectarianism and
homophobia. A society where your identity is embraced and celebrated.
We are about a new way of working within the institutions, ensuring
they deliver for all our people on the basis of equality and respect.
We are for a new, united and agreed Ireland.
You have an opportunity to stand with us. To stand for change.
There are some who want to sectarianise this election, to fight old
battles, to halt progress.
Their time is over. This is your time.
Last May we set out our agenda for the Departments. We stand
by that manifesto and have included a summary of its contents.
What we win together in this election, we win for all.

MICHELLE O’NEILL
PARTY LEADER IN THE NORTH

[3]

[4]

INTRODUCTION
FROM GERRY ADAMS
A chara,
Sinn Féin stands on our record.
With an increasing mandate across the island of Ireland, we have managed to bring about positive change
and deliver for citizens.
Sinn Féin leads the opposition in the Dáil and we have played a consistent role in the Assembly, however
the actions of the DUP have undermined the political institutions.
The people need and deserve effective representation which delivers for them in their daily lives.
This means that the Good Friday Agreement principles of equality, respect, parity of esteem, and fairness
must be implemented and the Irish and British governments must fulfil their obligations.
The recent admission by the Taoiseach that there remain outstanding elements of the Agreement is not
acceptable.
The Irish government needs to act as co-equal guarantors of your rights.
This election gives you the opportunity to send that message loud and clear.
Sinn Féin will hold them to account.
Sinn Féin will also stand against Brexit and the threat it poses to the
economy of the island and to the all-island architecture of the Good Friday
Agreement.
Sinn Féin proposes a special designated status for the north within the
European Union that ensures Ireland is protected.
Sinn Féin are for public services. We are for people having their due rights
and entitlements. We are for the unity of the people of this country.
And on March 2nd we need every vote possible to advance
our agenda for positive change across the island of
Ireland.
Bígí linn, vótáil Sinn Féin.
Is mise le meas,

GERRY ADAMS TD
Sinn Féin President
[5]

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

OF 2016 ASSEMBLY MANIFESTO
SINN FÉIN’S MAY 2016 MANIFESTO FOCUSED ON A
10 POINT PROGRAMME
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	
6.	
7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	

Health – £1 billion additional health spending;
Economy – 50,000 new jobs;
Housing – 10,000 new social and affordable homes;
Welfare – £500 million to help those in need;
Education – Increase to £525 million spend on
Childcare and Early Child Development Initiatives;
Infrastructure – £6 billion to improve roads, transport
and public services;
Rural - Extend fast-speed broadband to rural
communities;
Tackling Crime – ring-fence funding for front line
policing;
Equality – promote equality measures for all people
and all communities
Building the momentum towards Irish Unity

This Programme will deliver growth in the Economy,
provision of proper Public Services and ensure the
promotion of Equality and Inclusion. In the new mandate,
we will continue to deliver this programme.
Our policies on health, education, employment,
infrastructure, children and young people, older people and
those denied their basic human rights were all designed to
ensure that we improved the quality of people’s lives.
In addition to the extra £1 billion of health spending we
are committed to investing additional funding so we can
deliver on the Bengoa Report and the vision that Michelle
O’Neill, the Health Minister, has set out.
In addition to the £6 billion to improve our infrastructure,
including the A5, A6 and Narrow Water Bridge, we are
ensuring that it is used to address regional imbalances,
so as jobs and prosperity are spread across our cities and
towns.
[6]

Sinn Féin’s May 2016 Manifesto
can be read at
www.sinnfein.ie/contents/43354

INTEGRITY
IN
GOVERNMENT
Sinn Féin believes in accountable and transparent government.
That means zero tolerance of corruption, malpractice and waste.
To maintain public confidence, all allegations of corruption must
be investigated with those responsible held to account.
The DUP’s handling of the RHI scandal has undermined public
confidence and will potentially cost the taxpayer £500 million.
This follows the other financial scandals associated with the DUP,
Red Sky and NAMA.
A credible investigation into the RHI scandal was not possible
while Arlene Foster remained in post as First Minister, given that
she was the Minister responsible for the scheme’s development.
Investigating allegations of corruption or the abuse of public
finances is not an orange or green issue. This is about allegations
of incompetence and corruption. That is why Sinn Féin Finance
Minister, Máirtín Ó Muilleoir has launched an Independent Public
Inquiry.
The abuse of public funds means the finances needed to deliver
health services, housing, education or welfare supports is at risk.
The waste of public money in the RHI scheme exacerbates the
already challenging financial environment due to the Tory austerity
agenda. To offset the worst of those excesses the Executive must
have control of the economic and fiscal powers in order to protect
the most vulnerable, to grow the economy and invest in our young
people.
SINN FÉIN’S PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■	 Full implementation of RHI inquiry recommendations;
■ 	Publication of party political donations;
■ 	Devolution of fiscal and taxation powers;
■ 	Introduction of a register of lobbyists;
■	Roll-out of public education and awareness campaign on
whistleblowing;
■	 Transparency in government and public life.
[7]

FORWARD

The
institutions
can only
work if
political
leaders
continuously
promote the
fundamental
principles of
partnership
government
and an equal
society.

MOVING
FORWARD
There can be no return to the status quo. That means that all
parties in government must uphold the principles of respect,
power sharing and parity of esteem. Sinn Féin in the powersharing Executive will exercise our democratic mandate to
deliver a new politics, a progressive politics that delivers for
all citizens.
Partnership government has collapsed under allegations of
corruption and malpractice.
The Irish and British governments, and especially the British
Government, have failed in their responsibilities as joint and
co-equal guarantors of the Good Friday Agreement.
Unionist majority rule and direct rule failed because they did
not have the consent of the people. The strength of the Sinn
Féin mandate has ensured that those days are gone.
The institutions can only work if political leaders continuously
promote the fundamental principles of partnership
government and an equal society. The DUP has refused to
adhere to the principles of the Good Friday Agreement,
equality of treatment, parity of esteem and mutual respect
for all citizens.
In any future negotiations Sinn Féin will uphold our
democratic mandate and give full expression to the rights and
entitlements of all sections of the electorate regardless of
national identity, political allegiance, religious belief or none,
sexual orientation, gender, class, disability, age, geography,
or ethnic origin.
SINN FÉIN PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■ The two governments must honour and implement the
Agreements in full;
■ Ensuring that resource decisions are based on objective
need.

[8]

The people of the North voted to remain in the European Union.
The Tory government are seeking to impose Brexit on Ireland. The
DUP stand with them and not with the people, or our economic
interests.
Sinn Féin will defend that democratic mandate and the rights of
citizens.
Sinn Féin believe that the only credible approach is for a designated
special status for the north within the EU that will uphold the
democratic vote of citizens, but will also ensure that the frontier
between the EU and Britain will not be on the island of Ireland.
Brexit undermines the integrity and status of the Good Friday
Agreement and the political institutions. It will be bad for our
economy, our people and our public services.
The north must continue to have free movement of our people,
goods, and services on a north/south basis, and between the
other member states of the EU enabling us to benefit from the
biggest trading bloc in the world.
The north receives agriculture and fisheries funding, structural and
investment funds and peace funding from the EU. These economic
benefits must be continued.
Sinn Féin is totally opposed to an EU frontier across Ireland.
Trade tariffs, physical checks or border passport controls are
unacceptable.
Sinn Féin will work to ensure the Irish government acts in the
national interest to make achieving designated special status
within the EU an objective of the Brexit negotiations.
SINN FÉIN’S PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■ 	Securing designated special status for the north;
■ 	Free movement of people, goods and services.

The north must continue to have free movement
of our people, goods, and services on a north/
south basis, and between the other member
states of the EU enabling us to benefit from the
biggest trading bloc in the world.

Sinn Féin’s
case to achieve Designated
Special Status can be read at
www.sinnfein.ie/brexit

[9]

EQUALITY
&RESPECT
Sinn Féin is
committed to
guaranteeing
religious and
civil liberty,
equal rights
and equal
opportunities
for all
citizens.

A commitment to equality, parity of esteem and respect must
guide any re-establishment of the political institutions. These
were the principles and values which the people voted for in the
Good Friday Agreement.
This will require a step change in the behaviour and attitude of
the DUP. It will also require a step change in the approach of the
Irish and British governments who are failing to fulfil their duties
as co-guarantors of the Good Friday Agreement.
Sinn Féin is committed to guaranteeing religious and civil liberty,
equal rights and equal opportunities for all citizens. There can be
no place for sectarianism, racism and misogyny in our institutions
and our society.
Peoples sexual orientation must be respected and accommodated.
The rights of the transgender community must also be respected.
Sinn Féin is committed to mainstreaming equality in all aspects
of political and public life. This will include putting in place the
necessary legislation to safeguard everyone’s equality and human
rights.
SINN FÉIN’S PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■	 A Bill of Rights;
■	 An anti-poverty strategy;
■	 Gender equality;
■	 Acht na Gaeilge;
■	 Marriage equality;
■	 Strengthening disability legislation;
■	 Strengthening racial discrimination legislation;
■	 An Anti-Sectarian Charter.

[10]

SINN FÉIN’S
OBJECTIVE IS A
NEW AND
UNITED IRELAND
- AN AGREED
IRELAND.

Partition has been a disaster for Ireland. It has failed the people
of the north and south. It has failed unionists. It has failed
nationalists. It has divided our people, our economies and our
systems of government. Ending partition has now taken on a new
imperative following the EU referendum. Brexit is a game changer.
Now is the time to look to the future, to begin to debate and plan
the type of Ireland in which we can all live and prosper.
The Good Friday Agreement, which was supported by people
right across the island, paved the way for greater all-Ireland
co-operation through all island bodies and, ultimately, for
reunification by peaceful and democratic means. Sinn Féin will
ensure that the Irish government, as a co-guarantor of the Good
Friday Agreement, upholds the rights of all Irish citizens, whether
they live in Cork or Derry.

UNITY

UNITY

A New and United Ireland will be multi-cultural, pluralist, inclusive
and accommodating to all our people in all their diversity. The
Orange tradition and the British identity of many people in the
north must be constitutionally protected in a new agreed, United
Ireland.
SINN FÉIN’S PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■ 	An island wide referendum on Irish unity;
■ 	Presidential voting rights for citizens in the north;
■ 	Greater development of the all-Ireland economy;
■ 	Sharing/integration of health and other public services

[11]

Sinn Féin’s
Towards a New Republic
can be read at
www.sinnfein.ie/contents/36068

THE PAST

We uphold
the rights of
all victims to
information,
full
disclosure
and truth.

ENGAGING
WITH THE

LEGACY
OF THE
PAST

Engaging with the legacy of the past remains one of the
outstanding challenges of the peace process. Sinn Féin
acknowledges the grief associated with every life lost in the
conflict. There can be no hierarchy of victimhood; all harm and
loss must be acknowledged. We are committed to delivering
equality of provision for all Victims and Survivors.
Sinn Féin is committed to the human rights compliant
implementation of the Stormont House Agreement legacy
mechanisms. We uphold the rights of all victims to information,
full disclosure and truth. The British government’s use of
‘national security’ to block any independent investigation
into their conflict policies and actions is not acceptable. They
fear accountability.
Sinn Féin will not tolerate attempts by the British governments
to give immunity to state forces and their surrogates in the
unionist death squads. The British government were actively
involved in the conflict. They were not neutral.
Sinn Féin remains totally committed to engaging with the
key challenges of truth, justice, acknowledgement and
healing. We are committed to pursuing reconciliation. We
are committed to building a future where we move beyond
historical antagonisms of the past. As part of that process we
are committed to adopting the UN gender approaches to post
conflict situations.
SINN FÉIN’S PRIORITIES INCLUDE:
■ 	The implementation of the legacy mechanisms agreed in
the Stormont House Agreement (2014);
■ 	The immediate resourcing and commencement of the
Lord Chief Justice’s five year Legacy Inquest Plan;
■ 	Opposition to partisan immunity for British state forces
[12]

